1. Declarative Pipeline

A Declarative Pipeline is a structured, simplified way to write Jenkins automation code using a specific syntax hierarchy. It must be 
enclosed within a pipeline block and is typically saved in a file named Jenkinsfile at the root of a code repository.

Key Syntax Elements

pipeline: The mandatory outer block that wraps the entire script.
agent: Defines where the pipeline runs (e.g., any, none, or a specific Docker container).
stages: A container for one or more individual execution stages.stage: A logical segment of the pipeline (e.g., 'Build', 'Test', 'Deploy').
steps: The actual commands or tasks executed inside a single stage.

Basic Jenkinsfile Template

pipeline {
    agent any 
    stages {
        stage('Build') {
            steps {
                echo 'Building application...'
            }
        }
        stage('Test') {
            steps {
                echo 'Running unit tests...'
            }
        }
        stage('Deploy') {
            steps {
                echo 'Deploying to production...'
            }
        }
    }
}

We will create a Pipeline project.

1. Go to Jenkins Dashboard. Click on New Item.
2. Give a name - CICD and select Pipeline. Click ok/save
3. Give a description, go to Definition and write a pipeline script. 
4. Select try sample pipeline (as we have just started), change any details and any stages if you want.  
5. Build the pipeline and see the console output for result.

2. Jenkins Agents (Multi-Node)
Here we have used agent any, but in industry it is advised to create pipeline/projects on another agent. Jenkins follows Master-Slave 
architecture, so it isn't advised to perform tasks on the server. 

Go to Manage Jenkins and see the message "Building on the built-in node can be a security issue. You should set up distributed builds."
You don't run builds on Built-in node, you just place order or instruction and that order runs on another server.

Click on Set up an Agent as you need another server for the worker node. So after this create an ec2 instance for Jenkins worker with all same t2.micro, ubuntu and allowing all http, https etc and 
8gb memory. 

Launch another ssh client/terminal and connect the jenkins-agent on it using ssh

Shared Libraries
User Management in Jenkins (Role Based)
CI/CD project with Kubernetes, ArgoCD, Prometheus
DevSecOps with OWASP, Trivy, Sonarqube
Email Notification on Pipeline Fail/Pass
